<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>XXXXXX <a href="letter-.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_2" name="Footnote_1_2"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_2"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> A boarder in the same convent.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_2_3" name="Footnote_2_3"/><a href="#FNanchor_2_3"><span class="label">[2]</span></a> Josephine was the portress of the convent.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_4" name="Footnote_1_4"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_4"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> To understand this passage, it must be remarked, that the Count de Gercourt had quitted the Marchioness de Merteuil for the Intendante de ⸺, who had on his account abandoned the Viscount de Valmont, and that then the attachment of the Marchioness to the Viscount commenced. As that adventure was long antecedent to the events which are the subject of these letters, it has been thought better to suppress the whole of that correspondence.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_5" name="Footnote_1_5"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_5"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> Not to tire the reader’s patience, we suppress many of the letters of this daily correspondence, and give only them we think necessary for unfolding the events of this society. For the same reason we suppress all those of Sophia Carnay, and several of those of the actors in this piece.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_6" name="Footnote_1_6"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_6"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> Madame de Volanges’ error informs us, that Valmont, like most profligate wretches, did not impeach his accomplices.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_7" name="Footnote_1_7"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_7"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> This is the same who is mentioned in Madame de Merteuil’s letters.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_8" name="Footnote_1_8"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_8"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> The letter that is mentioned here was not found; but there is reason to believe that it is that Madame de Merteuil mentions in her letter which Cecilia Volanges refers to.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_9" name="Footnote_1_9"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_9"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> Madame de Tourvel does not venture to say it is done by her order.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_10" name="Footnote_1_10"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_10"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> We shall hereafter suppress Cecilia Volanges and Chevalier Danceny’s letters, being uninteresting.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_11" name="Footnote_1_11"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_11"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> See <a href="#LETTER_XXXV">Letter the 35th</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_12" name="Footnote_1_12"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_12"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> Those who have not sometimes had occasion to feel the value of a word, of an expression consecrated by love, will not find any sense in this phrase.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_13" name="Footnote_1_13"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_13"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> The reader must have long since observed, from Madame de Merteuil’s manners, that she paid little regard to religion. All this detail would have been suppressed; but it was thought, that to show effects, it was necessary to touch upon the causes of them.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_14" name="Footnote_1_14"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_14"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> It is imagined Rousseau in his Emily; but the citation is not exact, and the application that Valmont makes is false; and, perhaps, Madame de Tourvel had not read Emily.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_15" name="Footnote_1_15"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_15"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> Mr. Danceny is wrong; for he had already made a confidant of Mons. de Valmont. See <a href="#LETTER_LVII">Letter the 57th</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_16" name="Footnote_1_16"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_16"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> Mademoiselle de Volanges having a little time after changed her confidant, as will be seen in the following Letters, there will no more be given in this collection of those she continued to write to her friend in the convent.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_17" name="Footnote_1_17"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_17"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> This letter was not found.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_18" name="Footnote_1_18"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_18"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> Hereafter will be seen, in <a href="#LETTER_CLII">the 152d Letter</a>, not Mr. de Valmont’s secret, but pretty nearly of what kind it was; and the reader will perceive, that we could throw no more light on that subject.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_19" name="Footnote_1_19"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_19"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> See <a href="#LETTER_LXXIV">Letter the 74th</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_2_20" name="Footnote_2_20"/><a href="#FNanchor_2_20"><span class="label">[2]</span></a> See <a href="#LETTER_LXX">Letter the 70th</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_3_21" name="Footnote_3_21"/><a href="#FNanchor_3_21"><span class="label">[3]</span></a> Several persons, perhaps, do not know that a macedoine is a collection of games at hazard, in which each person who cuts the cards has a right to choose when he holds the hand: it is one of the inventions of the age.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_4_22" name="Footnote_4_22"/><a href="#FNanchor_4_22"><span class="label">[4]</span></a> The commandant of the corps in which Prevan served.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_23" name="Footnote_1_23"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_23"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> Danceny does not know the way; he only repeats Valmont’s expression.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_24" name="Footnote_1_24"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_24"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> Voltaire’s comedy of Nanine.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_25" name="Footnote_1_25"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_25"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> The same village, half way on the roads.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_26" name="Footnote_1_26"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_26"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> New Heloise.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_2_27" name="Footnote_2_27"/><a href="#FNanchor_2_27"><span class="label">[2]</span></a> New Heloise.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_3_28" name="Footnote_3_28"/><a href="#FNanchor_3_28"><span class="label">[3]</span></a> Regnard’s Amorous Follies.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_29" name="Footnote_1_29"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_29"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> This letter was never found.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_30" name="Footnote_1_30"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_30"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> <a href="#LETTER_CXX">Letters cxx</a> and <a href="#LETTER_CXXII">cxxii</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_31" name="Footnote_1_31"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_31"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> See <a href="#LETTER_CXXVIII">Letter cxxviii</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_32" name="Footnote_1_32"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_32"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> Du Belloi’s tragedy of the Siege of Calais.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_33" name="Footnote_1_33"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_33"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> <a href="#LETTER_XLVI">Letters xlvi</a> and <a href="#LETTER_XLVII">xlvii</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_34" name="Footnote_1_34"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_34"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> Nothing having appeared in this correspondence that could resolve this doubt, we chose to suppress Valmont’s letter.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_35" name="Footnote_1_35"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_35"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> This box contained all the letters relative to her adventure with M. de Valmont.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_36" name="Footnote_1_36"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_36"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> <a href="#LETTER_LXXXI">Letters lxxxi</a> and <a href="#LETTER_LXXXV">lxxxv</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_37" name="Footnote_1_37"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_37"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> It is from this correspondence, from that given at the death of M. de Tourvel, and the letters confided to M. Rosemonde, by Madame de Volanges, that the present collection has been compiled; the originals are still existing in the possession of Madame de Rosemonde’s heirs.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_38" name="Footnote_1_38"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_38"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> This letter remained unanswered.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_1_39" name="Footnote_1_39"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_39"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> Particular reasons and considerations, which we shall always think it our duty to respect, oblige us to stop here.</p>
					<p>We cannot at this time give the reader neither the continuation of M. de Volanges’ adventures, nor the sinister events which fulfilled the miseries or ended M. de Merteuil’s Punishment.</p>
					<p>We shall be permitted, perhaps, some time or other, to complete this work, but we cannot pledge ourselves to this: even if we could, we should first think ourselves obliged to consult the taste of the public, who have not the same reasons we have to be concerned in this publication.</p>
				</div>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
