<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 156: Cecilia Volanges to the Chevalier Danceny</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-156" epub:type="chapter z3998:letter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal">156</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Cecilia Volanges to the Chevalier Danceny</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">(Annexed to the former.)</p>
			</header>
			<p>How happens it, my dear friend, I no longer see you; although I never cease wishing for it? Your inclinations then, are no longer like mine! Ah, it is now I am truly sorrowful! More so, than when we were totally separate. The affliction I was used to receive from others, now proceeds from you, which is more insupportable.</p>
			<p>For some days past, mama is never at home, and you know it⁠—I flattered myself you would have taken the opportunity; but you do not at all think of me⁠—I am very unhappy⁠—How often have you told me, I did not love as much as you did⁠—I was certain it was otherwise, and am now convinced. Had you called, you might have seen me; for I am not like you; I think of nothing but how to contrive to see you⁠—You deserve I should not tell you all I have done: but I love you so much, and have so strong a desire to see you, I can’t help telling you, and then I shall see if you really love me.</p>
			<p>I have secured the porter, and he has promised every time you come no one shall see you; and we may confide in him, for he is a very honest man. There is then no other difficulty to prevent anyone in the house seeing you, and that will be very easy to do; it is only to come at night; then there will be no danger at all⁠—for since mama goes out every day, she always goes to bed at eleven; so that we shall have a great deal of time.</p>
			<p>The porter told me when you had a mind to come this way, instead of knocking at the door, you need only tap at the window, and he would open the door directly, and then you can readily find the <em>back-stairs</em>⁠—As you will not have any light, I will leave my chamber door open, which will give you some little. You must take great care not to make any noise, particularly passing by mama’s little door. As to my waiting maid’s room, it is of no signification, for she has promised me not to be awake; and she is also a very good girl! When you are going away it will be the same thing⁠—Now we shall see whether you will come.</p>
			<p>O, Lord! I don’t know why my heart beats so while I am writing to you! Is it the forerunner of any misfortune, or is it the hope of seeing you that makes me thus? This I know, I never loved you so much, and never so much wished to tell you so. Come, then, my dear, dear friend, that I may a thousand times repeat I love you⁠—I adore you, and never will love any but you.</p>
			<p>I found a method to inform <abbr>M.</abbr> de Valmont I wanted to see him, and had something to say to him; and as he is our very good friend, will come tomorrow certainly. I will beg of him to give you my letter immediately⁠—That I shall expect you tomorrow night, and you will not fail to come, if you have not a mind to make your Cecilia very miserable.</p>
			<p>Adieu, my dear friend! I embrace you with all my heart.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Paris, <time datetime="12-04"><abbr>Dec.</abbr> 4, 17⁠—.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
