<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>CLXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-164" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">164</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title"><span class="smc">Madame de Rosemonde</span> to <span class="smc"><abbr>M.</abbr> Bertrand</span>.</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>I this instant received your letter, my dear Bertrand, informing me of the shocking event, to which my nephew is become the unhappy victim⁠—yes, undoubtedly, I shall have orders to give you; and it is they only can take off my thoughts a while from this afflicting intelligence.</p>
				<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Danceny’s challenge, which you sent me, is a convincing proof he was the aggressor; my intention therefore is, you should commence a prosecution in my name: for although my nephew, in compliance with his natural generosity, may have pardoned his enemy, his murderer, I ought to avenge at once his death, religion, and humanity. One cannot excite too much the severity of the laws against those remains of barbarism which still infect our morals; and I do not believe, in such cases, the forgiveness of injuries can be commanded us; therefore I expect you will prosecute this business with all that zeal and activity of which I know you so capable, and which you owe to my nephew’s memory.</p>
				<p>But first, take care to confer with <abbr>M.</abbr> the President ⸻ from me. I do not write to him, as I am so overwhelmed with grief. You will, therefore, apologise for me, and communicate this to him.</p>
				<p>Adieu, my dear Bertrand! I am well pleased with your conduct, and thank you for your good inclinations, and am your sincere friend.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Castle of ⸻ <time datetime="12-08"><abbr>Dec.</abbr> 8, 17⁠—.</time></p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
