<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 112: Madame de Rosemonde to the Presidente de Tourvel</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-112" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">112</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Madame de Rosemonde to the Presidente de Tourvel</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote class="letter-note">
				<p>(Dictated only.)</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>This instant, my lovely dear, I received your letter of the 11th,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a> and the mild reproaches it contains. You must confess you intended to make many more; if you had not recollected my title of mother, you would have given me a scolding. That would have been very unjust. It was my hope and wish, to have been able to answer you myself, which made me defer it daily; yet, after all, you see I am obliged to employ my waiting woman’s hand, to do me that office. The abominable rheumatism has again seized me; it has this time taken its residence in my right arm, so I am absolutely deprived of its use. This is the consequence of such a young blooming creature’s having old friends; they suffer from our disorders.</p>
				<p>As soon as my pains will give me any relief, assure yourself I will have a long chat with you. In the meantime I must acquaint you, I received both your letters. If it was possible, they would have redoubled my friendship for you; and that I shall never cease taking a lively share in everything that concerns you.</p>
				<p>My nephew is also a little indisposed; but it is not of any consequence, and need not give any uneasiness. It is a slight indisposition, which seems to affect his temper more than his health. We scarcely ever see him now.</p>
				<p>His retreat, and your departure, will not much enliven our little circle. The little Volanges has an immense deal of chat, and yawns all day, as if she would swallow you; for these few days especially, she does us the honour to fall into a profound sleep every evening.</p>
				<p>Adieu, my lovely dear! I am ever your sincere friend, your mama, your sister even, if my great age would allow me the title. I am, in few words, most tenderly attached to you.</p>
				<footer>
					<p>
						<span epub:type="z3998:valediction">Signed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Adelaide, for Madame de Rosemonde.</span>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">From the castle of ⸻,<br/>
					<time datetime="10-14"><abbr>Oct.</abbr> 14, 17⁠—.</time></p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
