<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>CXLIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-143" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">143</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The <span class="smc">Presidente de Tourvel</span> to <span class="smc">Madame de Rosemonde</span>.</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>The veil is rent, Madam, on which was painted my illusory happiness⁠—The fatal truth is cleared, that leaves me no prospect but an assured and speedy death; and my road is traced between shame and remorse. I will follow it⁠—I will cherish my torments if they will shorten my existence⁠—I send you the letter I received yesterday; it needs no reflections; it contains them all⁠—This is not a time for lamentation⁠—nothing remains but sufferings⁠—I want not pity, I want strength.</p>
				<p>Receive, Madame, the only adieu I shall make, and grant my last request: leave me to my fate⁠—forget me totally⁠—do not reckon me among the living. There is a limit in misery, when even friendship augments our sufferings and cannot cure them⁠—When wounds are mortal, all relief is cruel. Every sentiment but despair is foreign to my soul⁠—nothing can now suit me, but the darkness where I am going to bury my shame⁠—There will I weep crimes, if I yet can weep; for since yesterday I have not shed a tear⁠—my withered heart no longer furnishes any.</p>
				<p>Adieu, Madame! Do not reply to this⁠—I have taken a solemn oath on this letter never to receive another.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Paris <time datetime="11-27"><abbr>Nov.</abbr> 27, 17⁠—.</time></p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
