<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 142: Viscount de Valmont to the Marchioness de Merteuil</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-142" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">142</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Viscount de Valmont to the Marchioness de Merteuil</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>I don’t know, my charming friend, whether I have read or understood badly your letter, the little tale you relate, and the epistolary model it contains⁠—But this I must say, the last is an original, and seems very proper to take effect; therefore I only copied it, and sent it without farther ceremony to the celestial Presidente. I did not lose a moment, for the tender epistle was dispatched yesterday evening⁠—I chose to act so; for first, I had promised to write to her; and, moreover, I thought a whole night not too much for her to collect herself, and ruminate on <em>this grand event</em>, were you even to reproach me a second time with the expression.</p>
				<p>I expected to have sent you back this morning my well-beloved’s answer; it is now near twelve, and it is not yet come⁠—I shall wait until five; and if I receive no news by that time, I shall in person seek it, for everything must be done according to form, and the difficulty is only in this first step.</p>
				<p>Now you may believe I am impatient to know the end of your story of that man of your acquaintance, who was so violently suspected of not knowing how to sacrifice a woman upon occasion⁠—Did he not amend, and did not his generous friend forgive him?</p>
				<p>I am no less anxious to receive your ultimatum as you call it so politically; but I am curious, above all, to know if you can perceive any impression of love in this last proceeding? Ah! doubtless there is, and a good deal! But for whom? Still I make no pretensions; I expect everything from your goodness.</p>
				<p>Adieu, charmer! I shall not close my letter until two, in hope of adding the wished-for answer.</p>
				<p>
					<em>Two o’clock in the afternoon.</em>
				</p>
				<p>Nothing yet⁠—the time slips away; I can’t spare a moment⁠—but surely now you will not refuse the tenderest kisses of love.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Paris <time datetime="11-27"><abbr>Nov.</abbr> 27, 17⁠—.</time></p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
