<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LXXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-75" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">75</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title"><span class="smc">Cecilia Volanges</span> to <span class="smc">Sophia Carnay</span>.</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>[In this Letter, Cecilia Volanges gives a most circumstantial account of everything that relates to herself, in the events which the reader has seen at the end of the first volume, the 59th Letter, and the following; for this reason a repetition was thought unnecessary; at last she speaks of Viscount de Valmont, and thus expresses herself:]</p>
				<p>I assure you he is a very extraordinary man: my mamma speaks very ill of him, but the Chevalier Danceny is enamoured with him, and I believe he is in the right. I never saw a man so artful; when he gave me Danceny’s letter, it was amongst a good deal of company, and no one knew anything of the matter. It is true I was very much frightened, because I had no notion of any such thing, but hereafter I shall be on the watch. I conceive, already, how he would have me return the answer; it is very easy to understand him, for he has an eye tells one everything; I do not know how he contrives: he told me in the note which I mentioned to you, he would not seem to take any notice of me before mamma; really one would imagine he never thinks of it, and yet every time I want to look at him, I am sure to meet his eyes fixed upon me.</p>
				<p>There is a lady here, also an intimate friend of mamma’s, I did not know, who appears to me not to like <abbr>Mr.</abbr> de Valmont. Although he seems to be all attention to her, I am afraid he will soon grow tired of this life, and return to Paris; that would be dreadful indeed! He must be an exceeding good-natured man, to come here on purpose to serve his friend and me. I wish to know how I could testify my gratitude; but I don’t know how to speak to him; and if I even had the opportunity, I should be so ashamed I should not know what to say.</p>
				<p>I cannot speak to anybody freely, about my love affair, but Madame de Merteuil; perhaps even with thee, to whom I tell everything, if it was in a chatting way, I should be abashed. Even with Danceny himself, I have often felt, as it were, against my inclination, a kind of fear, which prevented me from saying everything I could wish. I am very sorry for it now, and I would give anything in the world for a moment, to tell him only once how much I love him. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> de Valmont has promised him, if I will be ruled by him, he will find an opportunity for us to see each other. I am very well inclined to do whatever he would have me; but I can’t conceive how it is possible.</p>
				<p>Farewell, my dear friend: I have no more room.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a></p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">From the Castle of ⸻ <time datetime="09-14"><abbr>Sept.</abbr> 14, 17⁠—.</time></p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
