<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 160: Madame de Volanges to Madame de Rosemonde</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-160" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">160</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Madame de Volanges to Madame de Rosemonde</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>I write this from the chamber of your unhappy friend, whose state is pretty much the same: there is to be a consultation held this afternoon, of four physicians⁠—I need not tell you this resource is oftener a proof of the danger than the means of relief.</p>
				<p>However, it seems her head is something better since last night⁠—her waiting maid told me this morning, her mistress ordered her to be called about twelve: she desired they should be left alone, and dictated a pretty long letter⁠—Julie adds, while she was folding it, Madame Tourvel was attacked with her delirium, so that the girl did not know who to direct it to. I was at first surprised the letter itself was not sufficient to inform her; but telling me she was afraid of committing a mistake, and that her mistress had ordered her to send it away immediately, I took it upon me to open it.</p>
				<p>There I found the enclosed writing, which is certainly not addressed to anybody, being addressed to too many⁠—Yet, I believe, our unhappy friend at first intended it for <abbr>M.</abbr> de Valmont, but gave way imperceptibly, to her disordered ideas. However, I thought it ought not to be sent to anyone⁠—I send it you, as you will see better than I can tell you, the thoughts that engage the head of our patient. Whilst she continues so intensely affected, I shall have very little hopes⁠—the body seldom recovers when the mind is so agitated.</p>
				<p>Adieu, my dear and worthy friend! I am happy you are far from the dismal spectacle I have incessantly before my eyes.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Paris, <time datetime="12-06"><abbr>Dec.</abbr> 6, 17⁠—.</time></p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
