<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 157: The Chevalier Danceny to the Viscount de Valmont</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-157" epub:type="chapter z3998:letter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">157</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The Chevalier Danceny to the Viscount de Valmont</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Doubt neither the emotions of my heart, or my proceedings, my dear Viscount⁠—Is it possible I could resist a wish of my Cecilia’s? Ah! it is she, and she alone, I will ever love! Her openness, her tenderness, have fixed such a spell over me, that nothing can ever efface, although I have been weak enough to suffer a distraction. Imperceptibly, I may say, engaged in another adventure, the remembrance of Cecilia has disturbed me in the tenderest moments; and perhaps my heart never rendered her a more faithful homage, than at the instant I was unfaithful to her. However, my dear friend, let us spare her delicacy, and hide my fault; not to deceive, but only not to afflict her. Cecilia’s happiness is the most ardent wish of my heart; and I should never forgive myself a fault which should cost her a tear.</p>
			<p>I feel I deserved the banter you pass upon me, relative to what you call my new system: but I beg you will be assured, I am not led by them at this time; I am resolved to prove it tomorrow⁠—I will go and accuse myself even to her who has been the cause and partner of my error⁠—I will tell her; “read my heart; there you will see the tenderest friendship; friendship united to desire so much resembles love! We have both been deceived; but although liable to error, I am incapable of deceit.” I know my friend well; she has probity, and is gentle; she will do more than pardon, she will approve my conduct; she has often reproached herself for having betrayed friendship: her delicacy has often alarmed her love: more considerate than me, she will strengthen my mind with those useful apprehensions which I rashly endeavoured to stifle in hers⁠—I shall owe my reformation to her, and my felicity to you. O, my friends! partake my gratitude: the idea of being indebted to you for my happiness, augments its value.</p>
			<p>Adieu, my dear Viscount! the excess of my joy does not prevent me from thinking and sharing your troubles. Why can I not serve you? <abbr>M.</abbr> de Tourvel still remains inexorable then! It is said she is very ill⁠—May she at once recover health and condescension, and forever make you happy! They are the vows of friendship; and I dare hope will be granted by love.</p>
			<p>I would write some time longer, but time presses, and perhaps Cecilia already expects me.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Paris, <time datetime="12-05"><abbr>Dec.</abbr> 5, 17⁠—.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
