<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 166: M. Bertrand to Madame de Rosemonde</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-166" epub:type="chapter z3998:letter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">166</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr>M.</abbr> Bertrand to Madame de Rosemonde</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Madam,</p>
			<p>In consequence of the orders you honoured me with, I waited on <abbr>M.</abbr> the President de ⸻, and communicated your letter to him, informing him at the same time, as you desired, I should do nothing without his advice. This respectable magistrate commanded me to observe to you, the prosecution you intended against <abbr>M.</abbr> the Chevalier Danceny would equally affect the memory of Monsieur your nephew, and his honour would necessarily be tainted by the decree of the court; which would be, doubtless, a very great misfortune. His opinion is, then, that you do not make any stir about the matter: but, on the contrary, that you should endeavour as much as possible to prevent the public officers from taking cognisance of this unfortunate business, which has already made too much noise.</p>
			<p>These observations, so replete with wisdom, oblige me to wait your farther orders.</p>
			<p>Permit me, Madam, to request, when you honour me with them, you will mention a word concerning your state of health, which, I dread much, so many crosses have impaired.</p>
			<p>I hope you will pardon the liberty I take, as it proceeds from my zeal and attachment.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">I am, with great respect, Madam, your, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Paris, <time datetime="10-10"><abbr>Dec.</abbr> 10, 17⁠—.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
