<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 86: The Marechale de ⸻ to the Marchioness de Merteuil</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-86" epub:type="chapter z3998:letter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal">86</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Marechale de ⸻ to the Marchioness de Merteuil</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">(Enclosed in the former.)</p>
			</header>
			<p>My good God! what is this I learn, my dear Madam? Is it possible that little Prevan should be guilty of such an abominable action to you! What is one not exposed to! We can be no longer safe in our own houses! Upon my word, these events are a consolation to age; I shall never forgive myself, as I have been partly the cause of your receiving such a monster into your house; I assure you, if what I hear is true, he shall never more set foot in mine: it is what everyone must do that has any sentiments of honour, if they act properly.</p>
			<p>I have been informed you was very ill, and have been very uneasy about your state of health; I beg you will let me hear from you; or if you are not able to write, pray let one of your women inform me how you are. A word will be sufficient to relieve my anxiety. I should have been with you this morning; but my doctor will not allow me to miss a day from my bath.</p>
			<p>I must go this morning to Versailles on my nephew’s business.</p>
			<p>Farewell, dear Madam! Depend upon my sincerest friendship.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Paris, <time datetime="09-25"><abbr>Sept.</abbr> 25, 17⁠—.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
