<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>CXLI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-141" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">141</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The <span class="smc">Marchioness de Merteuil</span> to the <span class="smc">Viscount de Valmont</span>.</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>Good God, Viscount! How troublesome you are with your obstinacy! What matters my silence to you? Do you believe it is for want of reasons I am silent? Ah! would to God! But no, it is only because it would be painful to tell them to you.</p>
				<p>Speak truth, do you deceive yourself, or do you mean to deceive me? The difference between your discourse and actions, leaves in doubt which I am to give credit to. What shall I say to you then, when I even do not know what to think?</p>
				<p>You seem to make a great merit of your last scene with the Presidente; but what does that prove in support of your system, or against mine? I never certainly told you, your love for this woman was so violent as not be capable of deceiving her, or prevent you from enjoying every opportunity that appeared agreeable and easy to you. I never even doubted but it would be equally the same to you, to satisfy, with any other, the first that offered, the desires she would raise. I am not at all surprised, that from a libertinism of mind, which it would be wrong to contend with you, you have once done designedly, what you have a thousand times done occasionally⁠—Don’t we well know this is the way of the world, and the practice of you all? and whoever acts otherwise is looked on as a simpleton⁠—I think I don’t charge you with this defect.</p>
				<p>What I have said, what I have thought, what I still think, is, you are nevertheless in love with your Presidente: not if you will with a pure and tender passion, but of that kind of which you are capable; for example, of that kind which makes you discover in a woman, charms and qualities she has not: which ranks her in a class by herself, and still links you to her even while you insult her⁠—Such, in a word, as a Sultan has for a favourite Sultana; that does not prevent him from often giving the preference to a plain Odalisk. My comparison appears to me the more just, as, like him, you never are the lover or friend of a woman, but always her tyrant or her slave. And I am very certain, you very much humbled and debased yourself very much, to get into favour again with this fine object! Happy in your success, as soon as you think the moment arrived to obtain your pardon, you leave me <em>for this grand event</em>.</p>
				<p>Even in your last letter, the reason you give for not entertaining me solely with this woman is, because you will not tell me anything of your <em>grand affairs</em>; they are of so much importance, that your silence on that subject is to be my punishment: and after giving me such strong proofs of a decided preference for another, you coolly ask me whether <em>we have a mutual interest!</em> Have a care, Viscount; if I once answer you, my answer shall be irrevocable: and to be in suspense, is perhaps saying too much; I will therefore now say no more of that matter.</p>
				<p>I have nothing more to say, but to tell you a trifling story; perhaps you will not have leisure to read it, or to give so much attention to it as to understand it properly? At worst, it will be only a tale thrown away.</p>
				<p>A man of my acquaintance, like you, was entangled with a woman, who did him very little credit; he had sense enough, at times, to perceive, this adventure would hurt him one time or other⁠—Although he was ashamed of it, yet he had not the resolution to break off⁠—His embarrassment was greater, as he had frequently boasted to his friends, he was entirely at liberty; and was not insensible, the more he apologised, the more the ridicule increased⁠—Thus, he spent his time incessantly in foolery, and constantly saying, <em>it is not my fault.</em> This man had a friend, who was one time very near giving him up in his frenzy to indelible ridicule: but yet, being more generous than malicious, or perhaps from some other motive, she resolved, as a last effort, to try a method to be able, at least, with her friend, to say, <em>it is not my fault.</em> She therefore sent him, without farther ceremony, the following letter, as a remedy for his disorder.</p>
				<p>“One tires of everything, my angel! It is a law of nature; it is not my fault.</p>
				<p>“If, then, I am tired of a connection that has entirely taken me up four long months, it is not my fault.</p>
				<p>“If, for example, I had just as much love as you had virtue, and that’s saying a great deal, it is not at all surprising that one should end with the other; it is not my fault.</p>
				<p>“It follows, then, that for some time past, I have deceived you; but your unmerciful affection in some measure forced me to it! It is not my fault.</p>
				<p>“Now a woman I love to distraction, insists I must sacrifice you: it is not my fault.</p>
				<p>“I am sensible here is a fine field for reproaches; but if nature has only granted men constancy, whilst it gives obstinacy to women, it is not my fault.</p>
				<p>“Take my advice, choose another lover, as I have another mistress⁠—The advice is good; if you think otherwise, it is not my fault.</p>
				<p>“Farewell, my angel! I took you with pleasure, I part you without regret; perhaps I shall return to you; it is the way of the world; it is not my fault.”</p>
				<p>This is not the time to tell you, Viscount, the effect of this last effort, and its consequences; but I promise to give it you in my next letter; you will then receive also my ultimatum on renewing the treaty you propose. Until when, adieu.</p>
				<p>Now I think on it, receive my thanks for your particular account of the little Volanges; that article will keep till the day after her wedding, for the scandalous gazette. I condole with you, however, on the loss of your progeny. Good night, Viscount.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline"><time datetime="11-24"><abbr>Nov.</abbr> 24, 17⁠—.</time> Castle of ⸻.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
