<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 130: Madame de Rosemonde, to the Presidente de Tourvel</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-130" epub:type="chapter z3998:letter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">130</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Madame de Rosemonde, to the Presidente de Tourvel</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Why, my lovely dear, will you no longer be my daughter? Why do you seem to announce that our correspondence is to cease?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-30" id="noteref-30" epub:type="noteref">30</a> Is it to punish me for not guessing at what was improbable; or do you suspect me of creating you affliction designedly? I know your heart too well, to imagine you would entertain such an opinion of mine.⁠—The distress your letter plunges me in is much less on my own account than yours. Oh! my young friend, with grief I tell you, you are too worthy of being beloved ever to be happy in love⁠—Where is there a truly delicate and sensible woman, who has not met unhappiness where she expected bliss? Do men know how to rate the women they possess?</p>
			<p>Not but many of them are virtuous in their addresses and constant in their affections⁠—but even among those, how few that know how to put themselves in unison with our hearts. I do not imagine, my dear child, their affection is like ours⁠—They experience the same transport often with more violence, but they are strangers to that uneasy officiousness, that delicate solicitude, that produces in us those continual tender cares, whose sole aim is the beloved object⁠—Man enjoys the happiness he feels, woman that she gives.</p>
			<p>This difference, so essential, and so seldom observed, influences in a very sensible manner, the totality of their respective conduct. The pleasure of the one is to gratify desires; but that of the other is to create them. To know to please, is in man the means of success; and in woman it is success itself.</p>
			<p>And do not imagine, the exceptions, be they more or less numerous, that may be quoted, can be successfully opposed to those general truths, which the voice of the public has guaranteed, with the only distinction as to men of infidelity from inconstancy; a distinction of which they avail themselves, and of which they should be ashamed; which never has been adopted by any of our sex but those of abandoned characters, who are a scandal to us, and to whom all methods are acceptable which they think may deliver them from the painful sensation of their own meanness.</p>
			<p>I thought, my lovely dear, those reflections might be of use to you, in order to oppose the chimerical ideas of perfect happiness, with which love never fails to amuse our imagination. Deceitful hope! to which we are still attached, even when we find ourselves under the necessity of abandoning it⁠—whose loss multiplies and irritates our already too real sorrows, inseparable from an ardent passion⁠—This task of alleviating your troubles, or diminishing their number, is the only one I will or can now fulfil⁠—In disorders which are without remedy, no other advice can be given, than as to the regimen to be observed⁠—The only thing I wish you to remember is, that to pity is not to blame a patient. Alas! who are we, that we dare blame one another? Let us leave the right of judging to the searcher of hearts; and I will even venture to believe, that in his paternal sight, a crowd of virtues, may compensate a single weakness.</p>
			<p>But I conjure you above all things, my dear friend, to guard against violent resolutions, which are less the effects of fortitude than despondency: do not forget, that although you have made another possessor of your existence (to use your own expression) you had it not in your power to deprive your friends of the share they were before possessed of, and which they will always claim.</p>
			<p>Adieu, my dear child! Think sometimes on your tender mother; and be assured you always will be, above everything, the dearest object of her thoughts.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Castle of ⸻</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
