<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>CXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-117" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">117</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title"><span class="smc">Cecilia Volanges</span> to the <span class="smc">Chevalier Danceny</span>.</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote>
				<p>(Dictated by Valmont.)</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>Do you think my dear friend there is any necessity to be angry with me to make me melancholy, when I know you to be in affliction; and do you think I have not my share of sufferings as well as you? I even partake of those I am obliged to give you; and still you are unjust. I see plainly what puts you out of temper; it is because I was silent to the two requisitions you made to me here; do you think an answer to it is so easy to give? Do you think I do not know what you want is not right? And if I am so distressed to refuse you at such a distance, how would it be if you was here? Then again I must be afflicted all my life for giving you a moments consolation.</p>
				<p>I hide nothing from you, I give you my reasons, you may judge for yourself; I should perhaps have done what you wish, had it not been for what I wrote you, that <abbr>M.</abbr> de Gercourt, who is the cause of all our trouble, will not come so soon; and as mama is greatly pleased with me now, I caress her as much as possible; who knows what I may bring her to: if we could be happy without having anything to reproach myself with, surely it would be much better. If I am to believe what I have often heard, that men, when they have loved their wives before marriage, do not love them so much after; the dread of that restrains me more than anything:⁠—Are you not sure of my heart, and will there not be always time enough.</p>
				<p>I promise you, if I cannot avoid marrying <abbr>M.</abbr> de Gercourt, who I already hate without knowing him, nothing shall prevent me from being yours as much as I can, even before anything, as I do not mind being loved by any but you:⁠—you will see if I act wrong it shall not be my fault; the rest is indifferent to me, provided you promise to love me always as much as you do now:⁠—but until then let me be as I am; and do not ask a thing I have good reasons not to do, and am vexed to refuse you.</p>
				<p>I would likewise be very glad <abbr>M.</abbr> de Valmont would not be so pressing on your account, which only makes me more unhappy: he is your very good friend I assure you; he does everything as you would do yourself; but adieu, my dear friend! it was late when I began to write, and spent a good part of the night at it. I am going to bed to retrieve the time I lost. I embrace you; but do not scold me any more.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Castle of ⸻ <time datetime="10-18"><abbr>Oct.</abbr> 18, 17⁠—.</time></p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
