<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XCV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-95" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">95</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title"><span class="smc">Cecilia Volanges</span> to the <span class="smc">Viscount de Valmont</span>.</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p><strong>Sir</strong>,</p>
				<p>I beg you will return me the key you gave me to put in the place of the other; since it must be so, I must agree to it.</p>
				<p>I don’t know why you should write to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Danceny, I did not love him: I don’t think I ever gave you any reason to say so; it has given us both a great deal of uneasiness:⁠—I know you have a friendship for him, therefore should not fret him nor me neither. I should be much obliged to you if, when you write to him next, you would assure him of the contrary; for he reposes his confidence in you: nothing gives me so much trouble as not to be believed when I say a thing.</p>
				<p>As to the key, you may make yourself perfectly easy; I remember all you wrote me very well; but if you have your letter still by you, and will give it to me at the same time, I assure you I shall take particular notice of it. If you contrive to give it me to-morrow as we go to dinner, I would give you the other key the day after at breakfast, and you could return it to me in the same way you did the first. Pray do not defer it any longer, as we ought not to give Mama an opportunity to discover it.</p>
				<p>When you have once got possession of the key, you will be so good to make use of it to take my letters; and by this means <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Danceny will oftener hear from me, which will be much more convenient than at present. I was a good deal frightened at first, which I hope you will be so good to excuse; and that you will, nevertheless, continue your friendship as heretofore: you may depend on my gratitude.</p>
				<p>I have the honour to be, <strong>Sir</strong>, Your most obedient Humble Servant.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">
						<time datetime="09-28"><abbr>Sept.</abbr> 28, 17⁠—.</time>
					</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
